README.md, before:

# TranQL

TranQL is a query language for interactive exploration of federated knowledge graphs.

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/NCATS-Tangerine/tranql.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/NCATS-Tangerine/tranql)

## Background

Previous [work](https://github.com/NCATS-Tangerine/ros) focused on a workflow language for automating biomedical queries. We've also [prototyped](https://github.com/NCATS-Tangerine/ros/blob/master/ros/wf5/workflow_5_main.cwl) similar workflows using the [Common Workflow Language (CWL)](https://www.commonwl.org/).

[Workflow languages](https://github.com/common-workflow-language/common-workflow-language/wiki/Existing-Workflow-systems) generally provide capabilities to support large scale, fault tolerant, reproducible, automated computing. These are critical features where processes that have been refined by teams over time must be automated and shared. Common characteristics of these systems include:
  * The ability to **manage multiple, interacting, long running** third party programs (eg, genomic sequence alignment)
  * Infrastructure level support for **reproducibility** via highly technical artifacts like Docker containers.
  * **Complex syntax** in formats like YAML, which are generally unfamilar to clinical data and medical experts.

While these features are essential for some applications, they are neither targeted at nor well suited to
  * **Iterative, interactive exploration** of large data sets.
  * **Accessibility** to communities like clinical data specialists and medical experts.
  * **A programmatic interface between applications** and a data source.
  
## Interactive Exploration

The ability to explore large data sets with queries is extremely familiar to clinical data experts and many medical informatics specialists. To make semantic databases more accessible to these communities, we designed TranQL to share structural and syntactic similarities with the most familiar and widely used languages for interactive distributed data analytics, while providing an interface to heterogeneous semantic graph services existing environments don't address.

In particular, the [Structured Query Language (SQL)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SQL) is among the most pervasive query languages in use. It is vital to the work of clinical data specialists. TranQL borrows concepts from SQL while borrowing elements of graph semantics from query languages like [Cypher](https://neo4j.com/developer/cypher-query-language/).

It must be noted here that the [W3C Semantic Web](https://www.w3.org/standards/semanticweb/) stack has the most robust and mature toolkit in this space surrounding technologies  including RDF and SPARQL. However, wide spread adoption of this stack has not approached the levels of technologies like SQL, REST and OpenAPI. Also, the W3C stack envisions a homogeneous RDF/SPARQL environment. We sought something able to embrace more heterogeneous data sources.

On a final contextual note, we've also evaluated a [GraphQL interface](https://mesostars.wordpress.com/2017/08/25/graphql-alpha/) to these federated data services. GraphQL, it's name not withstading, does not provide much in the way of constructs allowing the user to think explicitly in terms of a knowledge graph compared to Cypher or SPARQL. And, again, it's query syntax and approach is highly unfamiliar to clinical data and medical communities.

## Design

### Language

TranQL is a classic interpreter with a lexical analyzer & parser which produces a token stream. The tokens are interpreted to build an abstract syntax tree modeling the program's constructs which are then executed sequentially. The grammar supports three types of statements:
  * **SET**: Assign a value to a variable.
    - ```
       SET <variable> = <value>
      ```
  * **SELECT**: Select a graph described by a pattern from a service, given various constraints. Graph patterns are expressed using concepts from the [biolink-model](https://biolink.github.io/biolink-model/).
    - ```
       SELECT <graph> 
       FROM <service> 
       [WHERE <constraint> [AND <constraint]*]
       [[SET <jsonpath> AS <var> | [SET <var>]]*```
  * **CREATE GRAPH**: Create a graph at a service.
    - ```
       CREATE GRAPH <var> AT <service> AS <name>
      ```

## Translator Standard API

The [Translator standard graph API](https://github.com/NCATS-Gamma/NCATS-ReasonerStdAPI) is a protocol for exchanging graphs with federated data sources. TranQL works with endpoints supporting this standard.

## Backplane
 
The TranQL Backplane is a collection of endpoints supporting the standard API which implement reusable question answering services, or modules.

Backplane modules support a simplified syntax in the language for greater readability.

## Example

#### The Comment

The example program begins with a multi-line comment describing its intent:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/306971/52903897-53d7a980-31f2-11e9-8d43-538ee2d44ad3.png)

#### The First Select Statement

The first statement **selects a graph pattern** connecting disease nodes to chemical substances, both `biolink-model` [concepts](https://biolink.github.io/biolink-model/).

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/306971/52904001-9d74c400-31f3-11e9-8ea9-9362de79523b.png)

The **from clause** specifies the path to a Backplane endpoint. Because it begins with a "/", TranQL prepends the protocol, host, and port of a configured TranQL Backplane service. The service can be any endpoint implementing the standard graph endpoint interface.

The first **`where` constraint** parameterizes the disease question node sent to the service. In this case, it resolves an English word into ontology identifiers using the [bionames](https://bionames.renci.org/apidocs/) API. If curies are supplied, those are used directly. The latter approach is definitely more robust and specific. The former may be more helpful for quick interactive exploration, and may serve as a bridge to an NLP interface.

The rest of the constraints, because they do not map to graph query elements, are **transmitted to the service as `options`** in the standard protocol. The service being invoked validates and interprets the options. In the case above, the endpoint passes the options along to define a cohort in the ICEES clinical reasoner.

The final part of the select statement is a `set` statement which **uses a JSONPath query to extract chemical identifiers** from the result and store them as a variable.

#### The Second Select Statement

The second `select` statement sends a different graph query to the Gamma reasoner and parameterizes the chemical_substance concept with identifiers from the first clinical step. 

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/306971/52903985-7ddd9b80-31f3-11e9-9caf-ebcf96f84fc0.png)

The resulting **graph is saved as a variable**.

There's not yet a standard solution to explaining what graph patterns are supported by each endpoint. SQL lets users list the schema of a data source. Towards addressing this, Robokop(Gamma) provides a metadata endpoint describing its meta-knowledge-graph. The shallow hierarchy describes the kinds of transitions it supports and the data sources implementing the transitions.  See the "Viewer" tab [here](http://jsonviewer.stack.hu/#http://robokop.renci.org/api/operations).

#### Publishing to Visualizers

The TranQL Backplane implements two standard API endpoints for visualizing a knowledge graph. One supports the [UCSD NDEx network sharing platform](http://www.ndexbio.org/#/) and the other supports Gamma's answer visualization facility.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/306971/52903927-b9c43100-31f2-11e9-992e-11161e438a8b.png)

The program ends by publishing the answer set to both services.

##### NDEx:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/306971/52904073-95695400-31f4-11e9-9b1d-bfba64e532b7.png)

##### Gamma:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/306971/52904079-c5185c00-31f4-11e9-88bc-54e745c0c216.png)

Here's a [link to the Gamma visualization for the answer](http://robokop.renci.org/simple/view/fba34f9d-2254-4bcc-818c-fd77736eee2b).

## Status

TranQL is brand new and strictly alpha. 

## Installation and Usage

### Install:

Requires Python 3.7.x.

```
git clone <repository>
cd tranql
pip install -r tranql/requirements.txt
```
### Test
```
bin/test
```
### Run

To run a program, first start the backplane:
```
cd backplane
PYTHONPATH=$PWD/../.. python server.py
```
Then run the query:
```
bin/tranql --source tranql/queries/workflow-5.tranql
```
### Shell

Run the interactive interpreter.
```
bin/tranql --shell
```
### Options
```
$ bin/tranql --help
usage: main.py [-h] [-d] [-c] [-b BACKPLANE] [-i] [-s SOURCE] [-o OUTPUT]

TranQL

optional arguments:
  -h, --help                           show this help message and exit
  -d, --verbose                        Verbose mode. (default: False)
  -c, --cache                          Cache responses from backplane
                                       services? (default: False)
  -b BACKPLANE, --backplane BACKPLANE  Backplane URL prefix (default:
                                       http://localhost:8099)
  -i, --shell                          The interpreter read-eval-print-loop
                                       (REPL). (default: False)
  -s SOURCE, --source SOURCE           The program's source file (default:
                                       None)
  -o OUTPUT, --output OUTPUT           Output destination (default: None)
```
## Next

  * [X] Move to the latest standard API version (0.9.0)
  * [X] Implement basic NDEx visualization connectivity
  * [X] Implement basic Gamma visualization connectivity
  * [X] Query graphs with multiple occurrences of the same concept.
  * [X] Does the standard API need to support multiple values per question-graph node? (So far, looks like no)
  * [X] Queries with bidirectional links.
  * [X] Validate query terms exist in the biolink-model.
  * [X] Predicates in queries.
  * [X] Enforce constraint identifiers are sub-types of biolink-model parent types where this info exists.
  * [X] Index previous answer via standard API "knowledge_maps" construct.
  * [X] Integrate graph [metadata API](http://robokop.renci.org/api/predicates).

Commit message:

Updated readme to include instructions for running the TranQL API

README.md, after:

# TranQL

TranQL is a query language for interactive exploration of federated knowledge graphs.

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/NCATS-Tangerine/tranql.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/NCATS-Tangerine/tranql)

## Background

Previous [work](https://github.com/NCATS-Tangerine/ros) focused on a workflow language for automating biomedical queries. We've also [prototyped](https://github.com/NCATS-Tangerine/ros/blob/master/ros/wf5/workflow_5_main.cwl) similar workflows using the [Common Workflow Language (CWL)](https://www.commonwl.org/).

[Workflow languages](https://github.com/common-workflow-language/common-workflow-language/wiki/Existing-Workflow-systems) generally provide capabilities to support large scale, fault tolerant, reproducible, automated computing. These are critical features where processes that have been refined by teams over time must be automated and shared. Common characteristics of these systems include:
  * The ability to **manage multiple, interacting, long running** third party programs (eg, genomic sequence alignment)
  * Infrastructure level support for **reproducibility** via highly technical artifacts like Docker containers.
  * **Complex syntax** in formats like YAML, which are generally unfamilar to clinical data and medical experts.

While these features are essential for some applications, they are neither targeted at nor well suited to
  * **Iterative, interactive exploration** of large data sets.
  * **Accessibility** to communities like clinical data specialists and medical experts.
  * **A programmatic interface between applications** and a data source.

## Interactive Exploration

The ability to explore large data sets with queries is extremely familiar to clinical data experts and many medical informatics specialists. To make semantic databases more accessible to these communities, we designed TranQL to share structural and syntactic similarities with the most familiar and widely used languages for interactive distributed data analytics, while providing an interface to heterogeneous semantic graph services existing environments don't address.

In particular, the [Structured Query Language (SQL)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SQL) is among the most pervasive query languages in use. It is vital to the work of clinical data specialists. TranQL borrows concepts from SQL while borrowing elements of graph semantics from query languages like [Cypher](https://neo4j.com/developer/cypher-query-language/).

It must be noted here that the [W3C Semantic Web](https://www.w3.org/standards/semanticweb/) stack has the most robust and mature toolkit in this space surrounding technologies  including RDF and SPARQL. However, wide spread adoption of this stack has not approached the levels of technologies like SQL, REST and OpenAPI. Also, the W3C stack envisions a homogeneous RDF/SPARQL environment. We sought something able to embrace more heterogeneous data sources.

On a final contextual note, we've also evaluated a [GraphQL interface](https://mesostars.wordpress.com/2017/08/25/graphql-alpha/) to these federated data services. GraphQL, it's name not withstading, does not provide much in the way of constructs allowing the user to think explicitly in terms of a knowledge graph compared to Cypher or SPARQL. And, again, it's query syntax and approach is highly unfamiliar to clinical data and medical communities.

## Design

### Language

TranQL is a classic interpreter with a lexical analyzer & parser which produces a token stream. The tokens are interpreted to build an abstract syntax tree modeling the program's constructs which are then executed sequentially. The grammar supports three types of statements:
  * **SET**: Assign a value to a variable.
    - ```
       SET <variable> = <value>
      ```
  * **SELECT**: Select a graph described by a pattern from a service, given various constraints. Graph patterns are expressed using concepts from the [biolink-model](https://biolink.github.io/biolink-model/).
    - ```
       SELECT <graph>
       FROM <service>
       [WHERE <constraint> [AND <constraint]*]
       [[SET <jsonpath> AS <var> | [SET <var>]]*```
  * **CREATE GRAPH**: Create a graph at a service.
    - ```
       CREATE GRAPH <var> AT <service> AS <name>
      ```

## Translator Standard API

The [Translator standard graph API](https://github.com/NCATS-Gamma/NCATS-ReasonerStdAPI) is a protocol for exchanging graphs with federated data sources. TranQL works with endpoints supporting this standard.

## Backplane

The TranQL Backplane is a collection of endpoints supporting the standard API which implement reusable question answering services, or modules.

Backplane modules support a simplified syntax in the language for greater readability.

## Example

#### The Comment

The example program begins with a multi-line comment describing its intent:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/306971/52903897-53d7a980-31f2-11e9-8d43-538ee2d44ad3.png)

#### The First Select Statement

The first statement **selects a graph pattern** connecting disease nodes to chemical substances, both `biolink-model` [concepts](https://biolink.github.io/biolink-model/).

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/306971/52904001-9d74c400-31f3-11e9-8ea9-9362de79523b.png)

The **from clause** specifies the path to a Backplane endpoint. Because it begins with a "/", TranQL prepends the protocol, host, and port of a configured TranQL Backplane service. The service can be any endpoint implementing the standard graph endpoint interface.

The first **`where` constraint** parameterizes the disease question node sent to the service. In this case, it resolves an English word into ontology identifiers using the [bionames](https://bionames.renci.org/apidocs/) API. If curies are supplied, those are used directly. The latter approach is definitely more robust and specific. The former may be more helpful for quick interactive exploration, and may serve as a bridge to an NLP interface.

The rest of the constraints, because they do not map to graph query elements, are **transmitted to the service as `options`** in the standard protocol. The service being invoked validates and interprets the options. In the case above, the endpoint passes the options along to define a cohort in the ICEES clinical reasoner.

The final part of the select statement is a `set` statement which **uses a JSONPath query to extract chemical identifiers** from the result and store them as a variable.

#### The Second Select Statement

The second `select` statement sends a different graph query to the Gamma reasoner and parameterizes the chemical_substance concept with identifiers from the first clinical step.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/306971/52903985-7ddd9b80-31f3-11e9-9caf-ebcf96f84fc0.png)

The resulting **graph is saved as a variable**.

There's not yet a standard solution to explaining what graph patterns are supported by each endpoint. SQL lets users list the schema of a data source. Towards addressing this, Robokop(Gamma) provides a metadata endpoint describing its meta-knowledge-graph. The shallow hierarchy describes the kinds of transitions it supports and the data sources implementing the transitions.  See the "Viewer" tab [here](http://jsonviewer.stack.hu/#http://robokop.renci.org/api/operations).

#### Publishing to Visualizers

The TranQL Backplane implements two standard API endpoints for visualizing a knowledge graph. One supports the [UCSD NDEx network sharing platform](http://www.ndexbio.org/#/) and the other supports Gamma's answer visualization facility.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/306971/52903927-b9c43100-31f2-11e9-992e-11161e438a8b.png)

The program ends by publishing the answer set to both services.

##### NDEx:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/306971/52904073-95695400-31f4-11e9-9b1d-bfba64e532b7.png)

##### Gamma:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/306971/52904079-c5185c00-31f4-11e9-88bc-54e745c0c216.png)

Here's a [link to the Gamma visualization for the answer](http://robokop.renci.org/simple/view/fba34f9d-2254-4bcc-818c-fd77736eee2b).

## Status

TranQL is brand new and strictly alpha.

## Installation and Usage

### Install:

Requires Python 3.7.x.

```
git clone <repository>
cd tranql
pip install -r tranql/requirements.txt
```
### Test
```
bin/test
```
### Run

To run a program, first start the backplane:
```
cd backplane
PYTHONPATH=$PWD/../.. python server.py
```
Then run the query:
```
bin/tranql --source tranql/queries/workflow-5.tranql
```
### Web app

To run the web app, first start the TranQL API:

```
cd tranql
PYTHONPATH=$PWD/../ python api.py
```

Then follow the instructions in web/ to start the website.
### Shell

Run the interactive interpreter.
```
bin/tranql --shell
```
### Options
```
$ bin/tranql --help
usage: main.py [-h] [-d] [-c] [-b BACKPLANE] [-i] [-s SOURCE] [-o OUTPUT]

TranQL

optional arguments:
  -h, --help                           show this help message and exit
  -d, --verbose                        Verbose mode. (default: False)
  -c, --cache                          Cache responses from backplane
                                       services? (default: False)
  -b BACKPLANE, --backplane BACKPLANE  Backplane URL prefix (default:
                                       http://localhost:8099)
  -i, --shell                          The interpreter read-eval-print-loop
                                       (REPL). (default: False)
  -s SOURCE, --source SOURCE           The program's source file (default:
                                       None)
  -o OUTPUT, --output OUTPUT           Output destination (default: None)
```
## Next

  * [X] Move to the latest standard API version (0.9.0)
  * [X] Implement basic NDEx visualization connectivity
  * [X] Implement basic Gamma visualization connectivity
  * [X] Query graphs with multiple occurrences of the same concept.
  * [X] Does the standard API need to support multiple values per question-graph node? (So far, looks like no)
  * [X] Queries with bidirectional links.
  * [X] Validate query terms exist in the biolink-model.
  * [X] Predicates in queries.
  * [X] Enforce constraint identifiers are sub-types of biolink-model parent types where this info exists.
  * [X] Index previous answer via standard API "knowledge_maps" construct.
  * [X] Integrate graph [metadata API](http://robokop.renci.org/api/predicates).
